W-14326030-self-triggered-upgrade-LDS (#164)
mulesoft/docs-hosting: cloudhub-2/modules/ROOT/pages/ch2-patch-updates.adoc

xref:cloudhub::vpn-maintenance.adoc[Anypoint VPNs] used in CloudHub 2.0 are upgraded continuously. Whenever a new update is available, the VPN is patched within the service-level agreement. If the Anypoint VPN is not setup as high availability or if the non-high-availability VPN is not set up with two tunnels, downtime is expected.

> == Self-Triggered Infrastructure Upgrades

Reviewer: @aishwarya-murali  should we be documenting that self upgrade feature is behind the feature flag.

Reviewer 2: decided to not hide behind feature flag

After applying the upgrade, you can check the status under the the *Infra Status* column.

=== Apply the Self-Triggered Upgrade via API

You can upgrade a private space using the Upgrade Private Space API. 

==== Check for Available Upgrades

To check if there is an upgrade available for your private space, use the `isSpaceUpgradeAvailable` field added to existing PrivateSpaces APIs. The following examples show the API request and response:

Request:

[source,json]
---- 
GET
https:/anypoint.mulesoft.com/runtimefabric/api/organizations/{organizationId}/privatespaces/{privatespaceId}
----

Response:

[source,java]
----
{
    "id": "69f1b6f6-2bd9-4ceb-a145-a75f11a5eaee",
    "name": "mySpace",
    "status": "Active",
    // EXTRA NON-RELEVANT FIELDS
    "isSpaceUpgradeAvailable": true
}
----

=== Apply Upgrades to your Private Space

If there is a new version available, you can upgrade your private space to the latest available version via the Upgrade Private Space API. The following examples show the API request and response:

Request:

[source,json]
---- 
PATCH 
https:/anypoint.mulesoft.com/runtimefabric/api/organizations/{organizationId}/privatespaces/{privateSpaceId}/upgrade

> ----

Reviewer 3: This has a new change now (not yet released but being released this week). The API needs to be called with an **optin** query parameter, like this:

```
PATCH 
https:/anypoint.mulesoft.com/runtimefabric/api/organizations/{organizationId}/privatespaces/{privateSpaceId}/upgrade?optIn=true
```

if optIn is false or it is not passed the response will be a 400 error (Bad Request)

xref:cloudhub::vpn-maintenance.adoc[Anypoint VPNs] used in CloudHub 2.0 are upgraded continuously. Whenever a new update is available, the VPN is patched within the service-level agreement. If the Anypoint VPN is not setup as high availability or if the non-high-availability VPN is not set up with two tunnels, downtime is expected.

> == Self-Triggered Infrastructure Upgrades

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Opt-in Early Infrastructure Upgrades (Optional)
```

> You can manually apply infrastructure upgrades earlier than the scheduled patching process. In this way, you can choose a time that better suits your organization's needs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can opt into infrastructure upgrades earlier than the scheduled patching process (between Release Available dates and Auto-Update dates - insert link to table). In this way, you can choose a time that better suits your organization's needs. 
```

[NOTE]

> This upgrade is irreversible. Test in a lower environment before applying it in a production environment, and perform during low traffic windows.

Reviewer 2: Need to add comment around how long it takes on average and what the impact is to the rest of the private space. @jesica-fera @mnuchat

Reviewer 2: If there are a lot of users simultaneously opting into the early upgrades, your upgrade could be sitting in the queue and will take longer than 30 mins to finish. The impact should be consistent with the auto patching behavior described above.

Reviewer 4: How about 
"Sometimes your upgrade may be queued and will take longer than 30 mins to complete. The impact is consistent with the default upgrade behavior - insert link"

> This upgrade is irreversible. Test in a lower environment before applying it in a production environment, and perform during low traffic windows.

Reviewer 4: Customers may wonder why we recommend to do this "during low traffic windows".

How about we recommend the customer to read and understand the impact of the upgrade and choose when to trigger the upgrade based on the impact they might see?

> This upgrade is irreversible. Test in a lower environment before applying it in a production environment, and perform during low traffic windows.

Reviewer 4: "Test in a lower environment"

Customers may wonder - test what exactly? What should customers look for to know whether they should apply the early upgrade in higher envs?

> === Apply the Self-Triggered Upgrade via Runtime Manager

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Apply the Opt-in Upgrade via Runtime Manager
```

xref:cloudhub::vpn-maintenance.adoc[Anypoint VPNs] used in CloudHub 2.0 are upgraded continuously. Whenever a new update is available, the VPN is patched within the service-level agreement. If the Anypoint VPN is not setup as high availability or if the non-high-availability VPN is not set up with two tunnels, downtime is expected.

== Opt-in Early Infrastructure Upgrades (Optional)

> You can opt into early infrastructure upgrades to be applied earlier than the scheduled patching process, between the Release Available and Auto-Update dates stated in the xref:release-notes::cloudhub-2/cloudhub-2-runtimes-release-notes.adoc[monthly updates table]. In this way, you can choose a time that better suits your organization's needs. 

Reviewer 5: Would it be "You can opt-in to early infrastructure upgrades..."

> You can opt into early infrastructure upgrades to be applied earlier than the scheduled patching process, between the Release Available and Auto-Update dates stated in the xref:release-notes::cloudhub-2/cloudhub-2-runtimes-release-notes.adoc[monthly updates table]. In this way, you can choose a time that better suits your organization's needs. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can opt-in to early infrastructure upgrades so that they are applied earlier than the scheduled patching process, between the Release Available and the Auto-Update dates stated in the xref:release-notes::cloudhub-2/cloudhub-2-runtimes-release-notes.adoc[monthly updates table]. In this way, you can choose the time that better suits your organization needs. 
```

> On average, this upgrade takes between thirty to sixty minutes to complete. If your upgrade is queued, it might take longer than thirty minutes. The impact of the upgrade process on running applications is consistent with the auto patching behavior described in the previous sections.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
On average, this upgrade takes between thirty to sixty minutes to complete. If your upgrade is queued, it can take longer than thirty minutes. The impact of the upgrade process on running applications is consistent with the auto-patching behavior described in the previous sections.
```

[NOTE]

> This upgrade is irreversible. Ensure that you understand what the impact of the upgrade is, and choose when to trigger the upgrade based on your organization's needs before applying it in a production environment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This upgrade is irreversible. Ensure that you understand the impact of the upgrade and choose when to trigger the upgrade based on your organization needs before applying it in a production environment.
```

=== Apply the Opt-in Upgrade via Runtime Manager

. From Anypoint Platform, select *Runtime Manager* > *Private Spaces*.
+
If an upgrade is available for a private space, a tooltip shows under the *Infra Status* column.
. Click *Upgrade available*.
. Select the checkbox to confirm that you agree to upgrade early.
. Click *Upgrade*.

After applying the upgrade, you can check the status under the the *Infra Status* column.

=== Apply the Self-Triggered Upgrade via API

You can upgrade a private space using the Upgrade Private Space API. 

==== Check for Available Upgrades

To check if there is an upgrade available for your private space, use the `isSpaceUpgradeAvailable` field added to existing PrivateSpaces APIs. The following examples show the API request and response:

Request:

[source,json]
---- 
GET
https:/anypoint.mulesoft.com/runtimefabric/api/organizations/{organizationId}/privatespaces/{privatespaceId}
----

Response:

[source,java]
----
{
    "id": "69f1b6f6-2bd9-4ceb-a145-a75f11a5eaee",
    "name": "mySpace",
    "status": "Active",
    // EXTRA NON-RELEVANT FIELDS
    "isSpaceUpgradeAvailable": true
}
----

> === Apply Upgrades to your Private Space

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
=== Apply Upgrades to Your Private Space
```

If there is a new version available, you can upgrade your private space to the latest available version via the Upgrade Private Space API. The following examples show the API request and response:

Request:

[source,json]
---- 
PATCH 
https:/anypoint.mulesoft.com/runtimefabric/api/organizations/{organizationId}/privatespaces/{privateSpaceId}/upgrade?optIn=true
----

Response:

[source,java]
----
{
    "id": "69f1b6f6-2bd9-4ceb-a145-a75f11a5eaee",
    "name": "mySpace",
    "status": "Active",
    // EXTRA NON-RELEVANT FIELDS
    "isSpaceUpgradeAvailable": false
}
----

[NOTE]
This request must contain an `optIn` parameter. If the `optIn` parameter is not passed or is passed with a `false` value, the API returns a `400 Bad Request` error.

==== Check the Upgrade Status

> After you trigger the upgrade, you can check the status via the `globalSpaceStatus `field on the response of the Private Spaces API, which contains a subfield with the status of the current upgrade.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After you trigger the upgrade, you can check the status via the `globalSpaceStatus` field on the response of the Private Spaces API, which contains a subfield with the status of the current upgrade.
```

[source,json]
---- 
GET
https:/anypoint.mulesoft.com/runtimefabric/api/organizations/{organizationId}/privatespaces/{privatespaceId}
----

Response:

[source,java]
----
{
    "id": "69f1b6f6-2bd9-4ceb-a145-a75f11a5eaee",
    "name": "mySpace",
    "status": "Active",
    // EXTRA NON-RELEVANT FIELDS
    "globalSpaceStatus": {
        "space": {
           "status": "Active"
        },
        "cluster": [
         {
           "name": "jferaPreviousAP11-ap-southeast-2-eabb4",
           "infra": {
             "status": "InfrastructureProvisionSuccess",
             "lastSeenTimeStamp": 1695756774114
           },
          "fabric": {
            "status": "Active",
            "lastSeenTimeStamp": 1695763243212
          },
          "ingress": {
            "status": "INGRESS_APPLIED",
            "lastSeenTimeStamp": 1695760545873
          }
         }
      ],
      "network": {
         "status": "InfrastructureProvisionSuccess",
         "lastSeenTimeStamp": 1695756773862
      },
      "upgrade": {
         "status": "In Progress"
      }
    },
    
"isSpaceUpgradeAvailable": false
}
----

===== Possible Status Types

[%header,cols="20,70"]
|===
|Status | Description

> |Active | The private space is currently not ongoing any infrastructure upgrade or configuration update, and is working as expected. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
|Active | The private space is currently not ongoing any infrastructure upgrade or configuration update and is working as expected. 
```
